docs: create autocli documentation (#15353)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/docs/building-modules/09-autocli.md

> ---

Reviewer: Could you bring in the changes from this file in this PR too: https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/13811/files#diff-ee2f066a7b97e94071ef696e92ced9fac24f3f3714a83fdf9da85732af1e8a2aR62

sidebar_position: 1
---

# AutoCLI

:::note Synopsis
This document details how to build CLI and REST interfaces for a module. Examples from various Cosmos SDK modules are included.
:::

:::note

## Pre-requisite Readings

* [Building Modules Intro](./01-intro.md)

:::

The `autocli` package is a [Go library](https://pkg.go.dev/cosmossdk.io/client/v2/autocli) for generating CLI (command line interface) interfaces for Cosmos SDK-based applications. It provides a simple way to add CLI commands to your application by generating them automatically based on your gRPC service definitions. Autocli generates CLI commands and flags directly from your protobuf messages, including options, input parameters, and output parameters. This means that you can easily add a CLI interface to your application without having to manually create and manage commands.

## Getting Started

Here are the steps to use the `autocli` package:

> 1.  Define your app's modules that implement the `appmodule.AppModule` interface.

Reviewer: spacing

> 2.  Create an instance of the `autocli.AppOptions` struct that specifies the modules you defined. 

Reviewer: I would explain it is a method on app module `func (am AppModule) AutoCLIOptions() *autocliv1.ModuleOptions`

> 3. Use the EnhanceRootCommand() method provided by autocli to add the CLI commands for the specified modules to your root command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Use the `EnhanceRootCommand()` method provided by autocli to add the CLI commands for the specified modules to your root command.
```

Here's an example of how to use `autocli`:

``` go
// Define your app's modules
testModules := map[string]appmodule.AppModule{
    "testModule": &TestModule{},
}

// Define the autocli AppOptions
autoCliOpts := autocli.AppOptions{
    Modules: testModules,
}

// Get the root command
rootCmd := &cobra.Command{
    Use: "app",
}

// Enhance the root command with autocli
autocli.EnhanceRootCommand(rootCmd, autoCliOpts)

// Run the root command
if err := rootCmd.Execute(); err != nil {
    fmt.Println(err)
}
```

> To use the autocli package, import it in your project and reference it in your code. For example, the `autocli.AppOptions` struct and `EnhanceRootCommand()` method can be found in the app.go file located in the `client/v2/autocli directory`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the autocli package, import it in your project and reference it in your code. For example, the `autocli.AppOptions` struct and `EnhanceRootCommand()` method can be found in the app.go file located in the `client/v2/autocli` package.
```

> To use the autocli package, import it in your project and reference it in your code. For example, the `autocli.AppOptions` struct and `EnhanceRootCommand()` method can be found in the app.go file located in the `client/v2/autocli directory`.

Reviewer: Can we precise `EnhanceRootCommand` does not create commands if it is already registered for a module, which means that it is additive only.

> 

Reviewer: Can we add a note about how depinject creates an appOptions automatically, so we can inject a `autocli.AppOptions`, to get all modules.

## Flags

`autocli` generates flags for each field in a protobuf message. By default, the names of the flags are generated based on the names of the fields in the message. You can customise the flag names using the `namingOptions` parameter of the `Builder.AddMessageFlags()` method.

To define flags for a message, you can use the `Builder.AddMessageFlags()` method. This method takes the `cobra.Command` instance and the message type as input, and generates flags for each field in the message.

```go reference

> https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/main/client/v2/autocli/common.go#L44-L49

Reviewer: Can we use a commit instead of main? Otherwise, if changes happen, the line won't be good.

Like https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/1ac260cb1c6f05666f47e67f8b2cfd6229a55c3b/client/v2/autocli/common.go#L44-L49

Author: yah sorry was about to get to this

service MyService {
  rpc MyMethod(MyRequest) returns (MyResponse) {}
}
```

`autocli` will generate a command named `my-method` for the `MyMethod` method. The command will have flags for each field in the `MyRequest` message.

If you want to customise the behavior of a command, you can define a custom command by implementing the `autocli.Command` interface. You can then register the command with the `autocli.Builder` instance for your application.

Similarly, you can define a custom query by implementing the `autocli.Query` interface. You can then register the query with the `autocli.Builder` instance for your application.

To add a custom command or query, you can use the `Builder.AddCustomCommand` or `Builder.AddCustomQuery` methods, respectively. These methods take a `cobra.Command` or `cobra.Command` instance, respectively, which can be used to define the behavior of the command or query.

## Advanced Usage

### Specifying Subcommands

By default, `autocli` generates a command for each method in your gRPC service. However, you can specify subcommands to group related commands together. To specify subcommands, you can use the `autocliv1.ServiceCommandDescriptor` struct.

> This example shows how to use the `autocliv1.ServiceCommandDescriptor` struct to group related commands together and specify subcommands in your gRPC service by defining an instance of `autocliv1.ModuleOptions` in your appmodule.AppModule implementation.

Reviewer: I would explain that this usually lives in an `autocli.go` file as well

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# AutoCLI

:::note Synopsis
This document details how to build CLI and REST interfaces for a module. Examples from various Cosmos SDK modules are included.
:::

:::note

## Pre-requisite Readings

* [Building Modules Intro](./01-intro.md)

:::

The `autocli` package is a [Go library](https://pkg.go.dev/cosmossdk.io/client/v2/autocli) for generating CLI (command line interface) interfaces for Cosmos SDK-based applications. It provides a simple way to add CLI commands to your application by generating them automatically based on your gRPC service definitions. Autocli generates CLI commands and flags directly from your protobuf messages, including options, input parameters, and output parameters. This means that you can easily add a CLI interface to your application without having to manually create and manage commands.

## Getting Started

Here are the steps to use the `autocli` package:

> 1. Import the `autocli` package in your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

2. Define your app's modules that implement the `appmodule.AppModule` interface.

> 3. Create an instance of the `autocli.AppOptions` struct that specifies the modules you defined. If you are using the `depinject` package to manage your app's dependencies, it can automatically create an instance of `autocli.AppOptions` based on your app's configuration. The `autocli.AppOptions` struct can be found in the `client/v2/autocli/app.go` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Use the `autocli.AppOptions` struct to specifies the modules you defined. If you are using the `depinject` package to manage your app's dependencies, it can automatically create an instance of `autocli.AppOptions` based on your app's configuration.
```

> 4. Implement the `AutoCLIOptions()` method on each module to specify the service and sub-commands to be mapped. This method `func (am AppModule) AutoCLIOptions() *autocliv1.ModuleOptions` returns a pointer to an instance of `autocliv1.ModuleOptions`, which contains the configuration for mapping the service and sub-commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. (optional) When willing to configure how behave `autocli`, implement the `func (am AppModule) AutoCLIOptions() *autocliv1.ModuleOptions` method on the module. Learn more [here](#advanced-usage).
```

This should be step 2 and  marked optional.

Author: ah yes forgot to add the blurb there

Similarly, you can define a custom query by implementing the `autocli.Query` interface. You can then register the query with the `autocli.Builder` instance for your application.

To add a custom command or query, you can use the `Builder.AddCustomCommand` or `Builder.AddCustomQuery` methods, respectively. These methods take a `cobra.Command` or `cobra.Command` instance, respectively, which can be used to define the behavior of the command or query.

## Advanced Usage

### Specifying Subcommands

By default, `autocli` generates a command for each method in your gRPC service. However, you can specify subcommands to group related commands together. To specify subcommands, you can use the `autocliv1.ServiceCommandDescriptor` struct.

This example shows how to use the `autocliv1.ServiceCommandDescriptor` struct to group related commands together and specify subcommands in your gRPC service by defining an instance of `autocliv1.ModuleOptions` in your `autocli.go` file.

```go reference
https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/bcdf81cbaf8d70c4e4fa763f51292d54aed689fd/x/gov/autocli.go#L9-L27
```

> With this configuration, you can invoke the `GetTest` method by running `./app tx myservice get test`, and you can invoke the `GetTest2` method by running `./app tx myservice get test2`.

Reviewer: This should still be updated to match the code snippet.

## Getting Started

Here are the steps to use the `autocli` package:

1.  Define your app's modules that implement the `appmodule.AppModule` interface.
2.  Create an instance of the `autocli.AppOptions` struct that specifies the modules you defined. 
3. Use the EnhanceRootCommand() method provided by autocli to add the CLI commands for the specified modules to your root command.

Here's an example of how to use `autocli`:

``` go
// Define your app's modules
testModules := map[string]appmodule.AppModule{
    "testModule": &TestModule{},
}

// Define the autocli AppOptions
autoCliOpts := autocli.AppOptions{
    Modules: testModules,
}

// Get the root command
rootCmd := &cobra.Command{
    Use: "app",
}

// Enhance the root command with autocli
autocli.EnhanceRootCommand(rootCmd, autoCliOpts)

// Run the root command
if err := rootCmd.Execute(); err != nil {
    fmt.Println(err)
}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

> To use the autocli package, import it in your project and reference it in your code. For example, the autocli.AppOptions struct and EnhanceRootCommand() method can be found in the app.go file located in the `client/v2/autocli directory`.

Reviewer: Can we use \` \` for the code here.

## Flags

`autocli` generates flags for each field in a protobuf message. By default, the names of the flags are generated based on the names of the fields in the message. You can customise the flag names using the `namingOptions` parameter of the `Builder.AddMessageFlags()` method.

To define flags for a message, you can use the `Builder.AddMessageFlags()` method. This method takes the `cobra.Command` instance and the message type as input, and generates flags for each field in the message.

``` go reference

> binder, err := b.AddMessageFlags(cmd.Context(), cmd.Flags(), inputType, options)

Reviewer: ditto (about reference)

if err != nil {
    return nil, err
}

cmd.Args = binder.CobraArgs

```

The `binder` variable returned by the `AddMessageFlags()` method is used to bind the command-line arguments to the fields in the message.

You can also customise the behavior of the flags using the `namingOptions` parameter of the `Builder.AddMessageFlags()` method. This parameter allows you to specify a custom prefix for the flags, and to specify whether to generate flags for repeated fields and whether to generate flags for fields with default values.

## Commands and Queries

The `autocli` package generates CLI commands and flags for each method defined in your gRPC service. By default, it generates commands for each RPC method that does not return a stream of messages. The commands are named based on the name of the service method.

For example, given the following protobuf definition for a service:

```protobuf
service MyService {
  rpc MyMethod(MyRequest) returns (MyResponse) {}
}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

`autocli` will generate a command named `my-method` for the `MyMethod` method. The command will have flags for each field in the `MyRequest` message.

If you want to customise the behavior of a command, you can define a custom command by implementing the `autocli.Command` interface. You can then register the command with the `autocli.Builder` instance for your application.

Similarly, you can define a custom query by implementing the `autocli.Query` interface. You can then register the query with the `autocli.Builder` instance for your application.

To add a custom command or query, you can use the `Builder.AddCustomCommand` or `Builder.AddCustomQuery` methods, respectively. These methods take a `cobra.Command` or `cobra.Command` instance, respectively, which can be used to define the behavior of the command or query.

## Advanced Usage

### Specifying Subcommands

By default, `autocli` generates a command for each method in your gRPC service. However, you can specify subcommands to group related commands together. To specify subcommands, you can use the `autocliv1.ServiceCommandDescriptor` struct.

> For example, suppose you have a service with two methods: `GetTest` and `GetTest2`. You can group these methods together under a `get` subcommand using the following code

Reviewer: This should be updated to fix the snippet.

```go reference

>  // AutoCLIOptions implements the autocli.HasAutoCLIConfig interface. 

Reviewer: For references, we actually need a GitHub link, with the lines containing the snippet :)
This won't work.

Author: lol haha will add now

 			}, 
 		}, 
 		Query: &autocliv1.ServiceCommandDescriptor{ 
 			Service: govv1.Query_ServiceDesc.ServiceName, 
 			// map v1beta1 as a sub-command 
 			SubCommands: map[string]*autocliv1.ServiceCommandDescriptor{ 
 				"v1beta1": {Service: govv1beta1.Query_ServiceDesc.ServiceName}, 
 			}, 
 		}, 
 	} 
 }
```

With this configuration, you can invoke the `GetTest` method by running `./app tx myservice get test`, and you can invoke the `GetTest2` method by running `./app tx myservice get test2`.

### Adding Custom Commands

Although `autocli` can automatically generate CLI commands and flags based on your protobuf messages, you may want to add custom commands to your CLI application. To add a custom command, you can use the `AddCommand()` method provided by `cobra`. For instance, to add a custom `test` command to your CLI application, you can use the following code:

``` go
rootCmd := autocli.RootCmd(appOptions)
rootCmd.AddCommand(&cobra.Command{
    Use:   "test",
    Short: "custom test command",
    RunE: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) error {
        // custom command logic here
        return nil
    },
})

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

This will add a new `test` command to your CLI application that can be invoked by running `./app test`.

## Customising Flag Names

By default, `autocli` generates flag names based on the names of the fields in your protobuf message. However, you can customise the flag names by providing a `FlagOptions` parameter to the `Builder.AddMessageFlags()` method. This parameter allows you to specify custom names for flags based on the names of the message fields. For example, if you have a message with the fields `test` and `test1`, you can use the following naming options to customise the flags

``` go
options := autocliv1.RpcCommandOptions{ 
    FlagOptions: map[string]*autocliv1.FlagOptions{ 
        "test": { Name: "custom_name", }, 
        "test1": { Name: "other_name", }, 
    }, 
}

> builder.AddMessageFlags(message, options)

Reviewer: spacing (can you maybe run markdownlint)
